# HASH TABLES

## 11.2-1 $\star$

> Suppose that a dynamic set S is represented by a direct-address table $\text{T}$ of length *m*. Describe a procedure that finds the maximum element of $\text{S}$. What is the worst-case performance of your procedure?

### Solution

## 11.2-2 $\star$

> Demonstrate what happens when we insert the keys $5, 28, 19, 15, 20, 33, 12, 17, 10$ into a hash table with collisions resolved by chaining. Let the table have $9$ slots, and let the hash function be $h(k) = k \mod 9$.

### Solution

There will be $\text{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8}$ slots in hash table.
And it will look like.

$$
\begin{array}{c|l}
h(k)     & \text{keys}      \\\\
\hline
0 \mod 9 &                  \\\\
1 \mod 9 & 10 \to 19 \to 28 \\\\
2 \mod 9 & 20               \\\\
3 \mod 9 & 12               \\\\
4 \mod 9 &                  \\\\
5 \mod 9 & 5                \\\\
6 \mod 9 & 33 \to 15        \\\\
7 \mod 9 &                  \\\\
8 \mod 9 & 17
\end{array}
$$

## 11.2-3 $\star$

> Professor Marley hypothesizes that he can obtain substantial performance gains by modifying the chaining scheme to keep each list in sorted order. How does the professor's modification affect the running time for successful searches, unsuccessful searches, insertions, and deletions?

### Solution

- Successful searches : no differnce, same time $\Theta(1+ \alpha)$.
- Unsuccessful searches : Faster, but still $\Theta(1+ \alpha)$
- Insertions : As usual, $\Theta(1+ \alpha)$.
- Deletions : Same as usual, but for doubly linked list, it becomes, $\Theta(1)$.

## 11.2-4 $\star$

> Suggest how to allocate and deallocate storage for elements within the hash table itself by linking all unused slots into a free list. Assume that one slot can store a flag and either one element plus a pointer or two pointers. All dictionary and free-list operations should run in $O(1)$ expected time. Does the free list need to be doubly linked, or does a singly linked free list suffice?

### Solution

The flag in each slot can be 1, if contains a value, and 0 if it is free. The free list must be a doubly linked list.

- SEARCH : Unmodified, expected time $\text{O(1)}$.
- INSERT : To insert $\text{x}$, first check if __T[$\text{h(x.key)}$]__ is free. If it is, delete __T[$\text{h(x.key)}$]__ and change its flag to __1__. If it wasn't free, simply insert $\text{x.key}$ at the start of the list stored there.
- DELETE : To delete $\text{x}$, first check if $\text{x.prev}$ and $\text{x.next}$ are NIL. If they are, then the list will be empty after deletion, so insert __T[$\text{h(x.key)}$]__ into the free list, update its flag to *0* and delete $\text{x}$ from the list, it's stored in.

All operations are $\text{O(1)}$.

## 11.2-5

> Suppose that we are storing a set of $n$ keys into a hash table of size $m$. Show that if the keys are drawn from a universe $U$ with $|U| > nm$, then $U$ has a subset of size $n$ consisting of keys that all hash to the same slot, so that the worst-case searching time for hashing with chaining is $\Theta(n)$.

### Solution

Assuming the *m*-1 slots contain at most *n*-1 elements, then the remaining slots should have

```
=> |U| - (m-1)(n-1) > nm - (m-1)(n-1)
=> n + m - 1 >= n
```
Thus, $\text{U} has a subset of size *n*.

## 11.2-6

> Suppose we have stored $n$ keys in a hash table of size $m$, with collisions resolved by chaining, and that we know the length of each chain, including the length $L$ of the longest chain. Describe a procedure that selects a key uniformly at random from among the keys in the hash table and returns it in expected time $O(L \cdot (1 + 1 / \alpha))$.

### Solution

Choose one of *m* spots in hash table at random. Let n$_k$, denote the number of elements stored at $\text{T[k]}$. Now pick a number $\text{x}$ from *1* to *L*. If $\text{x}$ < $n_k$, then return the $\text{x}$th element on the list. Otherwise repeat this process.

Probability of choosing an element in hash table is $\frac{1}{ml}$, so we return any key with equal probability.