# HASH TABLES

## 11.1-1 $\star$

> Suppose that a dynamic set S is represented by a direct-address table $\text{T}$ of length *m*. Describe a procedure that finds the maximum element of $\text{S}$. What is the worst-case performance of your procedure?

### Solution

If the elements stored in direct-address table $\text{T}$ are sorted, we can find, the maximum value in just $\text{O(1)}$. But in case, if it is not sorted, then we have to iterate over every key-value pair, and find the maximum, costing us $\text{O(n)}$.

If we have a maximum property, associated with our hash table, we can always check the MAXIMUM_VALUe and compare it, to get

```cpp
MAXIMUM(S)
    return TABLE_MAXIMUM(T,m-1)
//  if we have Max property in hash-table
//  return GIVE-MAX(S)

TABLE_MAXIMUM(T,l)
    if l < 0 : return NIL
    else if DIRECT_ADDRESS_SEARCH(T,l) != NIL : return l
    else return TABLE_MAXIMUM(T,l-1)
```

## 11.1-2 $\star$

> A __bit vector__ is simply an array of bits( 0s and 1s). A bit vector of length *m* takes much less space than an array of *m* pointers. DEscribe how to use a bit vector to represent a dynamic set of distinct elements with no satellite data. Dictationary operations should run in $\text{O(1)}$ time. 

### Solution

A bit vector, is a string, of $\text{0}$ and $\text{1}$, where *1* at a certain position represents existence of a certain element, and *0*, that no element is there.
Example = $\text{001010100010000010000} and S={2,4,6,10,16}
As you can see, the __bitmap__(bit vector) is large enough to accomdate more elements in $\text{S}$ easily. Operations are performed as:

```cpp
BITMAP_SEARCH(v,k)
    if V[k] != 0
        return k
    else return NIL
```

```cpp
BITMAP_INSERT(V,x)
    V[X] = 1
```

```cpp
BITMAP_DELETE(V,x)
    V[x]=0
```
Every operation takes $\text{O(1)}$ time.

## 11.1-3 $\star$

> Suggest how to implement a direct-address table in which the keys of stored elements do not need to be distinct and the elements can have satellite data. All three dictionary operations ($\text{INSERT}$, $\text{DELETE}$, and $\text{SEARCH}$) should run in $O(1)$ time. (Don't forget that $\text{DELETE}$ takes as an argument a pointer to an object to be deleted, not a key.)

### Solution

Each key in map, points to a doubly linked list.

- INSERT : Append the element to the doubly list in $\text{O(1)}$.
- DELETE : Remove the element from the linked list in $\text{O(1)}$ (assuming the element has pointers to location).
- SEARCH : Returns the first element from linked list, in $\text{O(1)}$.

## 11.1-4 $\star$

> We wish to implement a dictionary by using direct addressing on a _huge_ array. At the start, the array entries may contain garbage, and initializing the entire array is impractical because of its size. Describe a scheme for implementing a direct-address dictionary on a huge array. Each stored object should use $O(1)$ space; the operations $\text{SEARCH}$, $\text{INSERT}$, and $\text{DELETE}$ should take $O(1)$ time each; and initializing the data structure should take $O(1)$ time. ($\textit{Hint:}$ Use an additional array, treated somewhat like a stack whose size is the number of keys actually stored in the dictionary, to help determine whether a given entry in the huge array is valid or not.)

### Solution

The additional data structure can be a doubly linked list $\text{S}$, working as a stack. Intially, $\text{S}$ is empty.
Each element stored in huge array will have 2 parts

- Key Value
- Pointer to and element in $\text{P}$, which contains a pointer
back to the object in the huge array.

Operations :

- INSERT : To insert $\text{x}$, add an element *y* to the doubly LL based stack, which contains a pointer to position $\text{x}$ in the huge array. Update position __A[$\text{x}$]__ in huge array to contain a pointer to *y* in $\text{S}$.

- SEARCH : To search $\text{x}$, go to $\text{x}$ of *A* and go to the location stored there. If that location is an element of *S*, which contains a pointer to A[$\text{x}$], then we know $\text{x}$ is in *A*, otherwise $\text{x}$ is not in *A*.

- DELETE : To delete $\text{x}$, delete the element of $\text{S}$ which is pointed to by A[$\text{x}$].

All of these take $\text{O(1)}!