# Chapter 10.1 Stacks And Queues

## 10.1-1 $\star$

> Using Figure 10.1 as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in the sequence $\text{PUSH}(S, 4)$, $\text{PUSH}(S, 1)$, $\text{PUSH}(S, 3)$, $\text{POP}(S)$, $\text{PUSH}(S, 8)$, and $\text{POP}(S)$ on an initially empty stack $S$ stored in array $S[1..6]$.

### Solution

$$
\begin{array}{l|ccc}
\text {Push(S,4)} & 4                 \\\\
\text {Push(S,1)} & 4 & 1             \\\\
\text {Push(S,3)} & 4 & 1 & 3         \\\\
\text {Pop(S)} & 4 & 1             \\\\
\text {Push(S,8)} & 4 & 1 & 8         \\\\
\text {Pop(S)} & 4 & 1             \\\\
\end{array}
$$

## 10.1-2 $\star$

> Explain how to implement two stacks in one array $A[1..n]$ in such a way that neither stack overflows unless the total number of elements in both stacks together is $n$. The $\text{PUSH}$ and $\text{POP}$ operations should run in $O(1)$ time.


### Solution

Start one stack from array's `0th` position and other from array's last `nth` position in the same array, and overflows occur when total elements among them is equal to size of array.


## 10.1-3 $\star$

> Using Figure 10.2 as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in the sequence $\text{ENQUEUE}(Q, 4)$, $\text{ENQUEUE}(Q ,1)$, $\text{ENQUEUE}(Q, 3)$, $\text{DEQUEUE}(Q)$, $\text{ENQUEUE}(Q, 8)$, and $\text{DEQUEUE}(Q)$ on an initially empty queue $Q$ stored in array $Q[1..6]$.

$$
\begin{array}{l|ccc}
\text {Enqueue(Q,4)} & 4                 \\\\
\text {Enqueue(Q,1)} & 4 & 1             \\\\
\text {Enqueue(Q,3)} & 4 & 1 & 3         \\\\
\text {Dequeue(Q)}  & 1 & 3             \\\\
\text {Enqueue(Q,8)}  & 1 & 3 & 8         \\\\
\text {Dequeue(Q)} & 3 &8             \\\\
\end{array}
$$


## 10.1-4 $\star$

> Rewrite $\text{ENQUEUE}$ and $\text{DEQUEUE}$ to detect underflow and overflow of a queue.

```(cpp)
void enqueue(vector<int>& q, int ele){
    if(rear == MAX-1) cout <<"Overflow \n";
    else q[++rear]= ele;
    return;
}
```

```(cpp)
void dequeue(vector<int>& q){
    if(front == -1) cout << "Underflow\n";
    else if(f==r && f>-1) f=-1,r=-1;
    else f++;
    return;
}
```

## 10.1-5 $\star$

> Whereas a stack allows insertion and deletion of elements at only one end, and a queue allows insertion at one end and deletion at the other end, a **_deque_** (double-ended queue) allows insertion and deletion at both ends. Write four $O(1)$-time procedures to insert elements into and delete elements from both ends of a deque implemented by an array.

### Solution

```(cpp)
void push_front(vector<int>& q,int ele){
    if(f==-1 && r==-1){
        f=0;
        r=0;
        q[f]=ele;
    }
    if(f>0) q[--f] = ele;
}
```

```(cpp)
void push_back(vector<int>& q,int ele){
    if(f==-1 && r==-1){
        f=0;
        r=0;
        q[f]=ele;
    }
    if(r!= MAX-1) q[++r]=ele;
}
```

```(cpp)
void pop_front(vector<int>& q){
    if(f==-1 && r==-1){
        cout << "Underflow \n";
    }
    f++;
}
```
```(cpp)
void pop_back(vector<int>& q){
    if(f==-1 && r==-1){
        cout << "Underflow \n"
    r--;
}
```

## 10.1-6 $\star$

> Show how to implement a queue using two stacks. Analyze the running time of the queue operations.

### Solution

Queue can be implemented using 2 stacks.
Let the two stacks be $A$ and $B$.

- When the element is inserted into imaginary queue(actually a stack), it pushs all the elements from current stack to another stack in reverse order.

- $\text{Enqueue}$: $\Theta(1)$.
- $\text{Dequeue}$: worst $O(n)$,

$\text{ENQUEUE}$ pushes elements on $B$. $\text{DEQUEUE}$ pops elements from $A$. If $A$ is empty, the contents of $B$ are transfered to $A$ by popping them out of $B$ and pushing them to $A$. That way they appear in reverse order and are popped in the original.

## 10.1-7

> Show how to implement a stack using two queues. Analyze the running time of the stack operations.

### Solution

Let `q1` & `q2` be 2 queues. 
Two ways to implement stack with queues are 

1. Push operation costly
2. Pop operation costly

#### For first, the algorithm will be

Follow the below steps to implement the push(s, x) operation: 
- Enqueue x to q2.
- One by one dequeue everything from q1 and enqueue to q2.
- Swap the queues of q1 and q2.

Follow the below steps to implement the pop(s) operation: 

- Dequeue an item from q1 and return it.

#### For second case , the algorithm will be

Follow the below steps to implement the push(s, x) operation: 
- Enqueue x to q1 (assuming the size of q1 is unlimited).

Follow the below steps to implement the pop(s) operation: 

- One by one dequeue everything except the last element from q1 and enqueue to q2.
- Dequeue the last item of q1, the dequeued item is the result, store it.
- Swap the names of q1 and q2
- Return the item stored in step 2.
