# Elements of Dynamic Programming

## 15.3-1

> Which is a more efficient way to determine the optimal number of multiplications in a matrix-chain multiplication problem: enumerating all the ways of parenthesizing the product and computing the number of multiplications for each, or running $\text{RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN}$? Justify your answer.

Running $\text{RECURSIVE- MATRIX-CHAIN}$ is asymptotically more efficient than enumerating all the ways of parenthesizing the product and computing the number of multiplications for each.

$\text{RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN}$ finds the best way to parenthesize the left half, finds the best way to parenthesize the right half, and combines just those two results.


## 15.3-2

> Draw the recursion tree for the $\text{MERGE-SORT}$ procedure from Section 2.3.1 on an array of $16$ elements. Explain why memoization fails to speed up a good divide-and-conquer algorithm such as $\text{MERGE-SORT}$.

The tree intially has $1..16$, which recursively divides in half, until there is only $1$ element left in it, i.e. solving the subproblems, building up.
Which again backtracks to give, a sorted array.


## 15.3-3

> Consider a variant of the matrix-chain multiplication problem in which the goal is to parenthesize the sequence of matrices so as to maximize, rather than minimize, the number of scalar multiplications. Does this problem exhibit optimal substructure?

Yes, this is also behave as a optimal substructure. All we need to do is just find, the most expensive to compute(_maximize_).


## 15.3-4

> As stated, in dynamic programming we first solve the subproblems and then choose which of them to use in an optimal solution to the problem. Professor Capulet claims that we do not always need to solve all the subproblems in order to find an optimal solution. She suggests that we can find an optimal solution to the matrix-chain multiplication problem by always choosing the matrix $A_k$ at which to split the subproduct $A_i A_{i + 1} \cdots A_j$ (by selecting $k$ to minimize the quantity $p_{i - 1} p_k p_j$) _before_ solving the subproblems. Find an instance of the matrix-chain multiplication problem for which this greedy approach yields a suboptimal solution.

__*To-do*__

## 15.3-5

> Suppose that in the rod-cutting problem of Section 15.1, we also had limit $l_i$ on the number of pieces of length $i$ that we are allowed to produce, for $i = 1, 2, \ldots, n$. Show that the optimal-substructure property described in Section 15.1 no longer holds.

It won'y exhibhit the behaviour of optimal substructure as cutting one side, will affect the number allowed on the other side.
That is, there is not particular solution on one side of the cut, that changes what is allowed on the other.


## 15.3-6

> Imagine that you wish to exchange one currency for another. You realize that instead of directly exchanging one currency for another, you might be better off making a series of trades through other currencies, winding up with the currency you want. Suppose that you can trade $n$ different currencies, numbered $1, 2, \ldots, n$, where you start with currency $1$ and wish to wind up with currency $n$. You are given, for each pair of currencies $i$ and $j$ , an exchange rate $r_{ij}$, meaning that if you start with $d$ units of currency $i$ , you can trade for $dr_{ij}$ units of currency $j$. A sequence of trades may entail a commission, which depends on the number of trades you make. Let $c_k$ be the commission that you are charged when you make $k$ trades. Show that, if $c_k = 0$ for all $k = 1, 2, \ldots, n$, then the problem of finding the best sequence of exchanges from currency $1$ to currency $n$ exhibits optimal substructure. Then show that if commissions $c_k$ are arbitrary values, then the problem of finding the best sequence of exchanges from currency $1$ to currency $n$ does not necessarily exhibit optimal substructure.

As we already know, Rod-cutting algorithm follows the optimal substructure in cutting the rod in different parts, in order in maximize the profit

If, cutting the rod, costs some amount, it can be just needs to be reduced from profit to get actual answer.
But, if there are different costs for different lengths, there won't be a single solution for a subproblem.