# Chapter 2.2 Sort

> Bubblesort is a popular, but inefficient, sorting algorithm. It works by repeatedly swapping adjacent elements that are out of order.
>
> ```cpp
> BUBBLESORT(A)
>     for i = 1 to A.length - 1
>         for j = A.length downto i + 1
>             if A[j] < A[j - 1]
>                 exchange A[j] with A[j - 1]
> ```
>

## 2.2-a $\star$

> Let $A'$ denote the output of $\text{BUBBLESORT}(A)$ To prove that $\text{BUBBLESORT}$ is correct, we need to prove that it terminates and that
>
> A′[1]≤A′[2]≤ ⋯ ≤A′[n]
>
> where n = A.lengthn=A.length. In order to show that $\text{BUBBLESORT }$actually sorts, what else do we need to prove?

### Solution

Elements of $\text{A'}$ are sorted elements of $\text{A}$. 

## 2.2-b $\star$

> State precisely a loop invariant for the for loop in lines 2–4, and prove that this loop invariant holds. Your proof should use the structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter.

### Solution

To prove loop invariant for line 2-4, we need to show that A[j] is smallest element among them

**Intialization  :** Initially, the subarray inside could only contain 1 element, which is already the smallest element.

**Maintainence :** In every step, compare $\text{A[j]}$ & $\text{A[j-1]}$, making $\text{A[j-1]}$ smallest among $\text{A[j..n]}$.

**Termination :** It ends, when outer loop's $\text{j=i}$ and at the end making $\text{A[i]}$ the smallest in array $\text{A[i..n]}$.

## 2.2-c $\star$

> Using the termination condition of the loop invariant proved in part (b), state a loop invariant for the for loop in lines 1–4 that will allow you to prove inequality (2.3). Your proof should use the structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter.

### Solution

To prove this invariant, with help of invariant from last example, we need to just prove that  $\text{A[1..i]}$ contains elements less than $\text{A[i+1..n]}$

**Intialization  :** Initially, there is no element element in array $\text{A[1..i]}$, which is already the smallest element.

**Maintainence :** Afterr every step from $\text{(b.)}$, we can be sure that $\text{A[1..i]}$ elements are less than $\text{A[i+1..n]}$ which are sorted.

**Termination :** At the end we get a complete array from $\text{A[1..n]}$.

## 2.2-d $\star$

> What is the worst-case running time of bubblesort? How does it compare to the running time of insertion sort ?

### Solution

Worst case running time of bubble-sort is $\text{O(n*(n-1))}$ making it, ${O(n^2)}$, which is same as insertion sort.
