# Greedy Problems - Activity Selection

## 16.1-1

> Give a dynamic-programming algorithm for the activity-selection problem, based on recurrence $\text{(16.2)}$. Have your algorithm compute the sizes $c[i, j]$ as defined above and also produce the maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities.
>
> Assume that the inputs have been sorted as in equation $\text{(16.1)}$. Compare the running time of your solution to the running time of $\text{GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR}$.

```cpp
PRINT-ACTIVITIES(c, act, i, j)
    if c[i, j] > 0
        k = act[i, j]
        print k
        PRINT-ACTIVITIES(c, act, i, k)
        PRINT-ACTIVITIES(c, act, k, j)
```


```cpp
DYNAMIC_ACTIVITY_SELECTION(s,f,n)
    let c[0..n+1,0..n+1], f[0..n+1,0..n+1]; -> tables

    for i=0 to n
        c[i,i] = 0
        c[i,i+1] = 0

    c[n+1][n+1] = 0

    for l=2 to n+1
        for i=0 to n-len+1
            j = i+l;
            c[i,j] = 0
            k = j-1;
            while f[i] < f[k]
                if f[i] ≤ s[k] and f[k] ≤ s[j] and c[i, k] + c[k, j] + 1 > c[i, j]
                    c[i, j] = c[i, k] + c[k, j] + 1
                    act[i, j] = k
                k = k - 1
    print "Max size set of compatible activites" -> c[0,n+1]
    print "set contains"

    PRINT_ACTIVITIES(c,act,0,n+1)         
```

- $\text{GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR}$ runs in $\Theta(n)$ time and
- $\text{DYNAMIC-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR}$ runs in $O(n^3)$ time.


## 16.1-2

> Suppose that instead of always selecting the first activity to finish, we instead select the last activity to start that is compatible with all previously selected activities. Describe how this approach is a greedy algorithm, and prove that it yields an optimal solution.

In this case, if we select the last activity, that would mean we need to select all the activites with __*finish time < start time of last activity*__.

Which is just the reverse of our discussed greedy approach, from front. All the same reasons apply here!

## 16.1-3

> Not just any greedy approach to the activity-selection problem produces a maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities. Give an example to show that the approach of selecting the activity of least duration from among those that are compatible with previously selected activities does not work. Do the same for the approaches of always selecting the compatible activity that overlaps the fewest other remaining activities and always selecting the compatible remaining activity with the earliest start time.

If we don't have the start time and finish time arranged in proper order, it may lead to a not-needed answer, where there they be case like
- Rejecting better choices and selecting first
- Rejecting all if there is some issue of overlapping finish time and start time.


## 16.1-4

> Suppose that we have a set of activities to schedule among a large number of lecture halls, where any activity can take place in any lecture hall. We wish to schedule all the activities using as few lecture halls as possible. Give an efficient greedy algorithm to determine which activity should use which lecture hall.
>
> (This problem is also known as the **_interval-graph coloring problem_**. We can create an interval graph whose vertices are the given activities and whose edges connect incompatible activities. The smallest number of colors required to color every vertex so that no two adjacent vertices have the same color corresponds to finding the fewest lecture halls needed to schedule all of the given activities.)

Maintain two sets
- $F$ -> Free lecture halls
- $B$ -> Occupied lecture halls

Sort every lecture(activity) with start time. If there is a lecture, take a free lecture hall from $F$ and add that lecture to $B$. If $F$ is empty, check if any other lecture hall $B$ is free to use, if yes,assign to it. No, then wait

But this means that there are $m$ classes occurring simultaneously, so it is necessary to have $m$ distinct lecture halls in use.

## 16.1-5

> Consider a modification to the activity-selection problem in which each activity $a_i$ has, in addition to a start and finish time, a value $v_i$. The objective is no longer to maximize the number of activities scheduled, but instead to maximize the total value of the activities scheduled. That is, we wish to choose a set $A$ of compatible activities such that $\sum_{a_k \in A} v_k$ is maximized. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
